h1. The Secret Ingredients of Ruby

This is material we're preparing for an all-day pre-conference charity tutorial for "Scotland on Rails":http://scotlandonrails.com to benefit the "Children's Hospice Association of Scotland":http://www.chas.org.uk/. 

h1. Contents

These things make Ruby special. They aren't "advanced". They're fundamental:

# Blocks/closures
# Object-oriented vs. class-oriented (classes are less important than other languages, using mixins instead of inheritance, etc.)
# Class definitions are active (method calls in class scope, etc.)
# Hooks, callbacks, and reflection


Each of these four areas has an exercise and a homework project. The exercise is something that can be done in 30 minutes at the tutorial. The homework project is harder and probably involves reading some specific code.

h2. Blocks and closures

_Exercise_: Ruby-based configuration:

<pre>
configuration = configure do |config|
  config.tail_logs = true
  config.max_connections = 55
  config.admin_password = 'secret'_
  config.app_server do |app_server_config|
    app_server_config.port = 8808
    app_server_config.admin_password = config.admin_password
  end
end

configuration.class # => Configuration
configuration.tail_logs # => true
configuration.app_server.admin_password # => 'secret'
</pre>

_Extra Credit_: Look through all of the classes built into Ruby (or in the standard library) and find an interesting use of to_proc (and implement it!)


h2. Object Orientation and Mixins

_Exercise_: Module bundles

h2. Class definitions are active

_Exercise_: Implement has_many, belongs_to, and has_many :through for plain ol' Ruby objects

_Homework_: Read and map out how has_many works in ActiveRecord

h2. Hooks, callbacks, and reflection

_Exercise_: OpenConst (const_missing + OpenStruct)?

_Extra Credit_: __method__

_Homework_: Implement your own clone of Jim Weirich's Builder library


h1. Authors

* Marcel Molina, Jr.
* Chad Fowler

=======
h1. Thanks

* Mike Clark contributed ideas for the structure of the tutorial
* Dave Thomas taught Chad a lot of this stuff
* Alan Francis roped us into doing this tutorial and organized the conference
